---
title: Accounts and SSO
permalink: Reference/Core_Areas_and_APIs/Apps_and_MW/Accounts_and_SSO/

---

## Accounts And Single Sign On

Sailfish OS allows the user to create an account on the device, sign in
on the device, and then have multiple Sailfish OS applications and
services able to access the service with that account. Only privileged
applications are able to access account information, or use account
credentials to sign on to services.

### API

The current API for the Accounts domain in Sailfish OS is the
Accounts\&SSO API, originally by Nokia and now maintained by Canonical.
It consists of native C and C++ APIs, as well as QML bindings, however
only the C and C++ APIs are currently available in Sailfish OS. There
are plans to migrate away from the Accounts\&SSO APIs due to concerns
about its implementation and maintainability, however no concrete
roadmap for that work has yet been established.

The upstream Accounts\&SSO repository can be found at:
<https://gitlab.com/groups/accounts-sso>

### Storage Backend

The signond component of the Accounts\&SSO project stores account
credentials on Sailfish OS. It supports different storage plugins,
including encrypted databases, plain-text databases, and secure-storage
(hardware-protected) areas. Account credentials are linked to accounts
via an identifier which is stored in an account setting. The
libaccounts-glib component on the Accounts\&SSO project stores account
settings in an sqlite database.

### Roadmap

There are plans to move away from Accounts\&SSO and instead implement an
accounts framework specifically for Sailfish OS. It would consist of a
lightweight API layer which uses private DBus connections to talk to a
central accounts daemon. That accounts daemon would be responsible for
servicing requests made via DBus, enforcing per-application access
controls, secure storage, and OAuth2 token management and refreshing.

Currently, no concrete roadmap for this work has yet been defined.
Contributions are welcome.
