---
title: Hardware Adaptation Development Kit
permalink: Tools/Hardware_Adaptation_Development_Kit/

---

# Overview

If you want to get Sailfish OS running on a particular device then
you're doing Hardware Adaptation development.

It's about working with device bootloaders, configuring and building the
Linux kernel, low level Android™ systems, low level linux systems, C,
C++ and shellscript coding, debugging and working blind - all fun
stuff\!

There is a lot more detail at [the current HADK
site](https://sailfishos.org/develop/hadk/).

# Hardware Abstraction Layer

The [Architecture](/Reference/Architecture) section shows how Sailfish
OS sits on top of a HAL - a Hardware Abstraction Layer; in the case of
Sailfish OS this layer is itself split into a BSP layer and a hybris
layer. Typically the hardware vendor provides an Android™ Board Support
Package (BSP) which allows the Android™ operating system to drive the
hardware. Sailfish OS then uses the libhybris layer to connect the linux
system into the vendor's BSP.

## Board Support Packages

A board support package provides the variety of device drivers and other
low-level code components which allow the operating system to access the
functionality provided by the hardware platform, including CPU features
like power-saving, the GPU, and various sensors. In many cases, the BSP
will include components which are proprietary, binary blobs, and so the
source code will not be available.

## Libhybris

By utilising [libhybris](https://github.com/mer-hybris/libhybris) within
Sailfish OS, applications and libraries based on GNU Libc can access
functionality provided by libraries and services based upon Bionic. This
allows Sailfish OS to connect the Linux system into a board support
package from the vendor. This is possible since there is a large degree
of commonality between the low level Android™ and Sailfish OS
components.

## Development

The goal of a Hardware Adaptation developer is the creation of a board
specific HAL to address the [ hardware components](/Develop/HW_Adaptation).

As mentioned this is covered in great detail in the Hardware Adaptation
Development Kit which is a highly technical document which explains how
to port Sailfish OS to an Android™ device. You may [download a PDF of
the HADK](https://sailfishos.org/develop/hadk/).
