---
title: Testing
permalink: Develop/Apps/Testing/

---

## Testing

When testing a change, it is important to keep the testing environment
as stable as possible, to ensure that the testing results are the same
each time. Thus it is recommended to have the latest available SDK
installed.

### Debugging Output & Journal

Most application output (including debug logging as well as warnings or
critical error information) is recorded in the [systemd journal which
can be tuned for your degugging
needs](/Sailfish_OS_Cheat_Sheet#Diagnostics)

### Unit Tests

Any behaviour change made by a contributor should be matched with a new
unit test, to ensure that a future code change doesn't break the
functionality (i.e., a regression). In most cases, the unit tests are
run automatically as part of the continuous integration gating process
for the package, and so the contributor should ensure that their newly
added unit test is added to the "tests.xml" file (if it exists in the
repository) which tells "testrunnerlite" (the CI unit-test runner) to
run the test as part of integration testing. The contributor should also
run all of the unit tests manually, to ensure that their code change
hasn't accidentally caused a regression in behaviour.

If a particular package doesn't include unit tests, a change may still
be accepted by the maintainer even if the contribution doesn't include a
unit test for that change. However, this should be considered an
exception rather than the rule; where possible, unit tests should always
be added. If a particular component lacks unit tests for existing
functionality, this is a prime candidate for contribution from
quality-focused community members\! The more automatable the
quality-assurance process is, the faster we can release new versions of
Sailfish OS, and with higher confidence that no regressions were
introduced.
