---
title: Code_Walkthrough
permalink: Develop/Apps/Code_Walkthrough/

---

## Code Walkthrough

The template contains the essentials of a simple Sailfish OS
application. We’ll go through the code to help understand the
essentials.

When generating a new project based on the Sailfish OS application
template, some of the files in the Qt Creator project are named after
the name of the project. In the following discussion the project name
“myfirstapp” is used as an example.

### Application Entry

`=> src/myfirstapp.cpp`

Every Sailfish application must define a simple Qt C++ application
project that creates a QQuickView and instantiates a QML file with an
ApplicationWindow as the top-level item. However, other than
implementing the QML file itself, you don’t need to do anything else to
accomplish this.

Assuming you named your project “myfirstapp”, the Sailfish OS
application template generates the source file src/myfirstapp.cpp that
does the heavy lifting for you. This file implements the entry point to
your application by simply passing the argument count and argument array
to the function SailfishApp::main(). This function in turn creates the
required QGuiApplication and QQuickView instances and loads your main
QML file.

Note that the name of the QML file is not actually passed to
SailfishApp::main(). Instead, the function expects the QML file name to
be based on the name of your target. Again, if your project name is
“myfirstapp”, the Qt project file will contain the declaration TARGET
= myfirstapp, and main() will load the QML file qml/myfirstapp.qml.

The application template creates the QML file for you but you should be
aware of the fact that the file cannot be renamed without updating the
TARGET definition in the .pro file.

    #ifdef QT_QML_DEBUG
    #include 
    #endif
    
    #include 
    
    
    int main(int argc, char *argv[])
    {
        // SailfishApp::main() will display "qml/myfirstapp.qml", if you need more
        // control over initialization, you can use:
        //
        //   - SailfishApp::application(int, char *[]) to get the QGuiApplication *
        //   - SailfishApp::createView() to get a new QQuickView * instance
        //   - SailfishApp::pathTo(QString) to get a QUrl to a resource file
        //
        // To display the view, call "show()" (will show fullscreen on device).
    
        return SailfishApp::main(argc, argv);
    }

### Top-level QML file

`=> qml/myfirstapp.qml`

All QML files used by the application are in the directory qml or its
subdirectories. When the application starts, the SailfishApp::main()
function first loads the QML file qml/myfirstapp.qml.

    import QtQuick 2.0
    import Sailfish.Silica 1.0
    import "pages"

The first two import statements allow the application to import the Qt
Quick and Sailfish Silica modules we will later use. In addition, the
final import statement makes the QML files under the pages directory
available to myfirstapp.qml.

    ApplicationWindow
    {
        initialPage: Component { FirstPage { } }
        cover: Qt.resolvedUrl("cover/CoverPage.qml")
    }

ApplicationWindow is the top-level type of all Sailfish Silica
applications. The initialPage property specifies the first page to
display when the application is opened. The cover property sets the
active cover to be displayed when the application is pushed to the
background.

### First Page of the Application

`=> qml/pages/FirstPage.qml`

    Page {
        id: page

Here, we first create a Page object which is simply a container for the
contents of the page. To enable a pull-down menu, we need to create a
flickable item which places its children on a surface that can be pulled
and flicked. We do this using the SilicaFlickable component. Sailfish
Silica provides the types SilicaFlickable, SilicaListView, and
SilicaGridView which are styled versions of the Qt Quick flickable, list
view, and grid view types.

    SilicaFlickable {
            anchors.fill: parent

Next, we add a pulldown menu with one menu item, labelled “Show Page 2″.
We then attach an onClicked action to the MenuItem which will push the
second page onto the top of the pageStack (provided by
ApplicationWindow). Note that PullDownMenu and PushUpMenu must always be
nested inside a SilicaFlickable, SilicaListView, or SilicaGridView.

``` 
        PullDownMenu {
            MenuItem {
                text: "Show Page 2"
                onClicked: pageStack.push(Qt.resolvedUrl("SecondPage.qml")) 
            }
         }
```

We set the height of SilicaFlickable to be same as the height of its
child item called ‘column’ (see next paragraph).

``` 
 contentHeight: column.height 
```

Finally, we arrange the content vertically. The Column element positions
its child items so that they are vertically aligned and not overlapping.
We also provide the page title/header using the PageHeader element. The
page header is always placed at the top of content. We add a welcome
text to our page using the Label element.

``` 
        Column {
            id: column

            width: page.width
            spacing: Theme.paddingLarge
            PageHeader {
                title: "UI Template"
            }
            Label { 
                x: Theme.paddingLarge
                text: "Hello Sailors"
                color: Theme.secondaryHighlightColor
                font.pixelSize: Theme.fontSizeExtraLarge
            }
        }
```

The column spacing, label x, color, and font.pixelSize properties use
values from Theme type instead of hard coding sizes or colours. This
ensures the application adapts to the currently active theme and does
not clash with system provided components.

### Second Page of the Application

`=> qml/pages/SecondPage.qml`

The second page is pretty simple. It declares SilicaListView which has a
model to define the data to be displayed and a delegate to define how
each index of the data should be displayed.

    Page {
        id: page
        SilicaListView {
            id: listView
            model: 20
            anchors.fill: parent
            header: PageHeader {
                title: "Nested Page"
            }
            delegate: BackgroundItem {
                id: delegate
    
                Label {
                    x: Theme.paddingLarge
                    text: "Item " + index
                    anchors.verticalCenter: parent.verticalCenter
                    color: delegate.highlighted ? Theme.highlightColor : Theme.primaryColor
                }
                onClicked: console.log("Clicked " + index)
            }
            VerticalScrollDecorator {}
        }
    }

### Application Cover

`=> qml/cover/CoverPage.qml`

Covers are the visual representations of backgrounded applications that
are displayed on the running applications screen. We create a cover
using a CoverBackground element with a centered label inside it.

    CoverBackground {
        Label {
            id: label
            anchors.centerIn: parent
            text: "My Cover"
        }

A cover can specify a list of actions that can be performed on the
background application. The list is defined using CoverActionList
element. Each CoverActionList can define up to two CoverAction items to
specify the actions.

    CoverActionList {
            id: coverAction
            
            CoverAction {
                iconSource: "image://theme/icon-cover-next"
            }
            
            CoverAction {
                iconSource: "image://theme/icon-cover-pause"
            }
        }

In the snippet above we display next and pause actions on the cover
using two icons. You can also attach signal handlers to these actions to
perform a specific function and whilst we won’t cover that in detail in
this tutorial, you can try adding onTriggered: console.log("Cover next")
to the first CoverAction. Be sure to stop, rebuild, and rerun your
application to see the results.

### About Sailfish Silica Components

It’s important to note that Sailfish Silica QML components are designed
to be used together. While it may not be immediately obvious, several
Silica components cooperate to provide platform-specific functionality.

Editable text fields are one example of this. TextField is the Silica
component that provides a one-line editable text field. However, there
are several other types that have an effect on how editable text fields
behave.

If the TextField is not within a Silica Page, the text field may be
obscured by the virtual keyboard. The Page type ensures that page
content is scrolled to keep editable text fields visible when the
virtual keyboard is shown. Similarly, if the root element of the QML
application is not a Silica ApplicationWindow, the background of the
virtual keyboard is not correctly styled making it difficult to read the
keys.

If you encounter situations where your application behaves differently
to other Sailfish OS applications, your first course of action should be
to verify that you’re not unintentionally using standard Qt Quick
components when a more applicable Silica component is available. This is
most likely to be an issue if you’re porting an existing QML application
to Sailfish OS.

### Other Files and Directories in This Project

You will notice that in addition to the .qml and .cpp files, there are a
couple of other files that we have not touched so far. Let’s quickly go
through them before you start exploring the SDK.

`myfirstapp.desktop` is a standard Linux desktop configuration file that
describes how a particular program is to be launched, how it appears in
menus, etc. This file specifies for example the name and icon of your
applcation as they appear in the launcher. More information on the
desktop entry specification can be found at standards.freedesktop.org.

`myfirstapp.png` is the launcher icon for the application. The Icon
declaration in the .desktop file (e.g. the line Icon=myfirstapp) refers
to this image file. The application template takes care of deploying the
icon to the correct location, and the Icon declaration in the .desktop
file should always refer to the file just by its basename without the
suffix. Similarly to the main QML file, the name of the icon is based on
the TARGET declaration in the project file. Hence, the icon file name
should not be changed unless the TARGET declaration is also updated.

`myfirstapp.pro` is a project file that ties the source code and the
resulting application binary together. The file describes how the
application is built by creating the Makefile into the appropriate build
directory, which is then executed to actually build the application. The
CONFIG += sailfishapp declaration in the project file causes your
project to be linked against the libsailfishapp library that provides
the implementation of the SailfishApp::main() function discussed at the
beginning of this tutorial. The CONFIG declaration also ensures the
application binary and its data files are deployed to the proper
locations both on the emulator and on devices. For more information on
the format of the project file, see the qmake Manual.

The qml directory contains files that should be deployed as a part of
your application. In addition to QML files, audio, image, and JavaScript
files that are used by the application should be placed in this
directory or in a subdirectory in it. Basically, anything you put in the
qml directory gets deployed when your application is installed in the
emulator or on a device.

### Conclusion

Creating intuitive Sailfish Silica UI applications is straightforward.
The fact that they are based on QML, a declarative UI language, makes
the process fast and easy. It brings in a rich set of user interface
elements and an abundance of possibilities. Now you can explore and
learn more about how to use them in your application. Check out the
media gallery example code available in the SDK for more ideas.

Next, [Packaging Apps](/Develop/Apps/Packaging).
