---
title: Positioning
permalink: Reference/Core_Areas_and_APIs/Apps_and_MW/Positioning/

---

## Location and Positioning

Sailfish OS utilises the GeoClue framework for positioning, and clients
can use the QtPositioning APIs to receive position and satellite
information updates, and the QtLocation APIs to access location services
(such as querying nearby points of interest, accessing map tiles, and
calculating navigation routes between two positions).

Position information is highly confidential, and Sailfish OS supports a
policy framework which allows the user to lock the GPS positioning
capability.

### API

The location and positioning stack in Sailfish OS includes several API
components. All of the native API components are fully open-source.

#### Platform API

Sailfish OS uses the QtPositioning and QtLocation APIs as its platform
API, utilising the GeoClue backend for positioning. The latest upstream
version of the QtLocation API can be found at:
<http://code.qt.io/cgit/qt/qtlocation.git/>

There are some Sailfish OS-specific GeoClue provider plugins which
provide position and satellite updates to clients, and also a plugin to
connman which allows the GPS technology power state to be controlled by
clients using the connman API (whose internal implementation makes DBus
calls to the primary GeoClue provider plugin).

The code related to the location and positioning stack can be found in
the following repositories:

  - geoclue-provider-hybris, the main GeoClue provider plugin, using
    libhybris interfaces to control the GPS:
    <https://github.com/mer-hybris/geoclue-providers-hybris>
  - geoclue-provider-mlsdb, a secondary GeoClue provider plugin, using
    Mozilla Location Service to provide assisted-GPS position updates:
    <https://github.com/mer-hybris/geoclue-providers-mlsdb>
  - connman-plugin-jollagps, exposing GPS power state to connman:
    <https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/connman/blob/master/connman/plugins/jolla-gps.c>
  - Proprietary positioning plugins (e.g. for HERE) also exist but are
    not open-source.

#### Android Compatibility

Position data is shared with Android applications which have been
approved by the user, via a bridge service. This includes position
updates as reported by the device GPS if turned on, and also information
about satellites which are being used by the GPS.

### Contribution

Community or third-party contributions to various components of the
location and positioning stack in Sailfish OS is encouraged and
appreciated. The vast majority of the components are open-source, and
the developers of the components actively monitor issues raised within
the Mer Project gitlab instance (https://git.sailfishos.org/) and the
Mer Project bug tracker (https://bugs.merproject.org/), and are also
available in IRC (\#jollamobile@freenode) and via email.
