---
title: QML_Live_Coding_With_Qt_QmlLive
permalink: Develop/Apps/Tutorials/QML_Live_Coding_With_Qt_QmlLive/

---

Creating Qt Quick applications for Sailfish OS can be more effective
with the help of Qt QmlLive tool from [Qt Automotive
Suite](https://doc.qt.io/QtAutomotiveSuite/qtas-overview.html). Starting
with version 1701 of the Sailfish OS SDK a QmlLive version specifically
tailored for Sailfish OS application development comes preinstalled with
the SDK. Used in cooperation with Sailfish IDE it automatically
determines all Sailfish OS devices registered to the IDE, maintains its
own workspace directory to match the active project directory in the
IDE, allows per-project settings to be configured from within the IDE
and more. It can be also used as a standalone tool where development
within the IDE is not suitable.

## Design Your Application

Qt QmlLive supports live coding with two essential features. First it
allows to distribute source code modifications, removing the need to
redeploy your application to see the effect. Secondly it can instruct
yor application which particular QML component should it load instead of
the "main" one, so that each component can be worked on independently.

For the second feature an obvious limitation exists, that previewing a
selected QML component works as long as the QML component can be
instantiated and displayed as a top level Qt Quick Item or Window with
no special requirements on the symbols (internal APIs) available in the
instantiating QML scope. If this limitation is hit, it is usually
possible to deal with it by wrapping the component with a QML component
prepared just for the purpose of previewing with QmlLive, fulfilling all
the special requirements on the QML scope. Designing the application
with clear separation and encapsulation of its components is a better
option though. Ideally your UI components would be free of any
connection to the underlaying application logic, like in case of [Qt
Quick UI Forms](http://doc.qt.io/qtcreator/creator-quick-ui-forms.html).

Note that within [Sailfish
Silica](/Develop/Apps) such a
limitation currently exists for the `Page` component which can only be
instantiated as a descendant of an `ApplicationWindow`. As a result live
previewing single pages is not possible. An attempt to remove this
limitation is in progress.

For the purpose of this tutorial we will use the calculator application
available here: <https://github.com/sailfishapps/sailfish-calculator>.

## Prerequisities

Sailfish OS emulator comes fully prepared for use with Qt QmlLive and
does not require any extra configuration from your side. If you want to
use your hardware device, the following requirements must be met:

1.  The device is running Sailfish OS version 2.1.0 or newer
2.  Package **qmllive-sailfish** is installed on the device

## Using Qt QmlLive with Sailfish IDE

### Configure Your Project

![Enable receiving updates with Qt
QmlLive](Tutorial_-_QML_Live_Coding_With_Qt_QmlLive_-_QtC-enable.png
"Enable receiving updates with Qt QmlLive")

Open your project within Sailfish IDE and navigate to **Projects** mode,
switch to **Run** settings, scroll down to find the **Sailfish OS
Application Settings** group and enable receiving updates with Qt
QmlLive there.

You will be prompted to start QmlLive Bench now unless you have already
started it manually from the **Tools** menu. It is advisable to follow
the **Learn more** link and get familiar with the documentation
available in the IDE at this point. Apart from using the search
functionality you can quickly access the documentation anytime later
using the question mark icon appearing when the **Enable receiving
updates with Qt QmlLive** option is hovered.

### Run the Application

![QmlLive
Bench](Tutorial_-_QML_Live_Coding_With_Qt_QmlLive_-_The_Bench.png
"QmlLive Bench")

Now QmlLive Bench is running and ready to be used with the IDE. All
Sailfish OS devices configured within the IDE are visible in the
**Hosts** view inside the Bench and active workspace matches the root
directory of the active project in the IDE. The bottom part of the
QmlLive Bench window would display any warnings eventually produced by
QML engine, separately for each host. Only messages emitted by
[`QQmlEngine::warnings`](http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qqmlengine.html#warnings)
signal can arrive here, not the ordinary log messages. This output is
suitable to identify problems with instantiating a particular QML
component standalone – this has been highlighted in [\#Design Your
Application](#Design_Your_Application "wikilink").

Switch to **Edit** mode in the IDE and build and run your application as
usually. Under normal circumstances you will find the following two
messages in **Application Output** pane in the IDE while the application
is starting.

`  `  
`qmlliveruntime-sailfish initialized`  
`Waiting for connection from QmlLive Bench…`

  
![Hosts view when the application is
running](Tutorial_-_QML_Live_Coding_With_Qt_QmlLive_-_Hosts.png
"Hosts view when the application is running")

Your application will start and you will find the corresponding host in
QmlLive Bench indicating online state (green light) and
`qml/harbour-scientific-calculator.qml` as the current document. If it
happened that your workstation was under heavy load, so that it took too
long to launch the application, it may be necessary to connect the
corresponding host in QmlLive Bench manually by clicking the **Offline**
labelled button.

  

### Code Live

Everything is set up and you can start coding live. Open the file
`qml/elements/StdKeyboard.qml` and change the value assigned to
`buttonWidth` from 100 to 150. Save the file and the application reloads
immediately, rendering the buttons 150 px wide.

Check the log output pane of the host running your application for signs
of possible problems during reloading the component. The log output
within QmlLive Bench is cleared automatically each time a document is
reloaded. Full log output including regular log messages is available in
**Application Output** pane in the IDE. This contains all messages
issued since application startup, not only since the last reload
trigerred by QmlLive. For your convenience QmlLive visually separates
the log output with messages like this every time a document is
reloaded:

`  `  
`----------------------------------------`  
`QmlLive: (Re)loading "qml/harbour-scientific-calculator.qml"`

Let's say you would like to concentrate now on a single component from
your application. Switch to QmlLive Bench, browse for
`qml/elements/StdKeyboard.qml` in the workspace view, and drag & drop it
onto the host widget representing the device you use. Your application
reloads, displaying just the keyboard component now. This is also
indicated by the path displayed in the host widget. Switch to the IDE
and edit the keyboard component or any other component directly or
indirectly instantiated by the keyboard component. Do not forget to save
the file and briefly check the log view in QmlLive Bench for possible
issues.

If you develop for multiple devices, it is possible to run the
application simultaneously on all the devices. In that case you will
find useful the **All Hosts** widget. Dropping a document onto this
widget influences all connected hosts. Another feature useful when
working with multiple hosts is the **Follow** behavior. Activating a
document in the workspace view (e.g. by double clicking it – depending
on your platform) triggers active document change on all
**Follow**-enabled hosts.

## Standalone Usage

This section assumes you have read the above sections and that you are
familiar with building packages
[manually](/Develop/Apps/Tutorials/Building_packages_-_advanced_techniques).

QmlLive Bench can be run independently of the IDE – find its executable
in the `bin` subdirectory of the Sailfish OS SDK installation directory.
On the device side `qmlliveruntime-sailfish` exec wrapper is available
to set up your application to accept connection from QmlLive Bench.
Without the IDE it is necessary to connect the host manually in the
QmlLive Bench after the application is executed.

Basic usage, identical to running the application from the IDE:

`  `  
`$ qmlliveruntime-sailfish --update-on-connect /usr/bin/harbour-scientific-calculator`

Debugging is possible by setting the `exec-wrapper` option in GDB:

`  `  
`$ gdb -ex 'set exec-wrapper qmlliveruntime-sailfish [OPTION]...' /usr/bin/harbour-scientific-calculator`

QML-only applications can be run this way:

`  `  
`$ qmlliveruntime-sailfish [OPTION]... sailfish-qml APP_NAME`

Execute `qmlliveruntime-sailfish --help` to read full list of the
available options with documentation.

## Contribute

Repositories related to Qt QmlLive support for Sailfish OS application
development:

  - <https://github.com/sailfish-sdk/qmllive>  
    Fork of Qt QmlLive tailored to Sailfish OS needs
  - <https://github.com/sailfish-sdk/qmllive-sailfish>  
    Device side extensions for Sailfish OS application development
  - <https://github.com/sailfish-sdk/sailfish-qtcreator>  
    Qt Creator extended with support for Sailfish OS application
    development
