---
title: Portugese
permalink: Develop/L10n/Style_Guides/Portugese/

---

In Portuguese you should always adopt the informal “tu” tone, similar to
that employed in some social media sites, as opposed to the more formal
“você” tone.

# Grammar

In all Sailfish OS translations, you should use the new European
Portuguese spelling and grammar rules, as implemented by the new
Orthographic Agreement. Whenever in doubt, please check the available
resources (Jolla glossaries and translation memories,
[Infopedia](http://www.infopedia.pt) and
[Priberam](http://www.priberam.pt/dlpo/Default.aspx) dictionaries, or
[Portal da Língua
Portuguesa](http://www.portaldalinguaportuguesa.org/ "wikilink"), for
instance). Pay special attention to words that currently have two
acceptable spellings (always check the project memories to ensure the
utmost consistency).

In European Portuguese, you should pay special attention to possessive
pronouns, such as “seu” or “sua”, which should only be used when
strictly necessary.

For example:

  - Chairperson: **direção**

Should it not be possible to use a gender-neutral term in your
Portuguese translation, then you should use the appropriate masculine
term ‒ **diretor** in this instance.

## Tense

Use the present tense. E.g.:

  - Correct: **O leitor multimédia escolhe as músicas.**
  - Incorrect: **O leitor multimédia irá escolher as músicas.**

For example:

  - Correct: **Criar as Definições da Conta em...**
  - Incorrect: **As Definições da Conta serão criadas em...**

For example:

  - Correct: **Entra nas Definições**
  - Incorrect: **O Utilizador entra nas Definições**

Observe the rules of European Portuguese under the new Orthographic
Agreement (for instance, month names should be in lowercase, except when
these appear at the start of a sentence or as a standalone menu option).

# Punctuation

## Independent clauses

Do not use a comma between independent clauses joined by and (**e**) and
or (**ou**), even when one is used in the English source string. You
should however use a comma between independent clauses joined by but.

  - To open Account, go to Settings, and create new: **Para abrir a
    Conta, entra nas Definições e cria uma nova**

## Series

Use a comma to separate elements in a series, except for the last two
elements.

  - Create new, modify, and delete: **Criar novo, modificar ou
    eliminar**

Use a semicolon to separate items in a series when one or more items
have internal punctuation.

## Hyphenation

Pay special attention to the new rules of hyphenation under the new
Portuguese Orthographic Agreement. Whenever in doubt, please check the
available resources. For example:

  - Correct: **autoestrada, hiper-resistente**
  - Incorrect: **auto-estradainstead, hiper resistente**

# Numerals

For example:

  - Correct: **1 mensagem recebida**
  - Incorrect: **Uma mensagem recebida**

In European Portuguese, use a comma as decimal separator (eg. 2,5%) and
a dot as thousand separator (ex. 1.000).

# Terminology
