---
title: Telepathy Framework
permalink: Reference/Core_Areas_and_APIs/Apps_and_MW/Telephony/Telepathy_Framework/

---

[Telepathy Framework](/Reference/Core_Areas_and_APIs/Apps_and_MW/Telephony/Telepathy_Framework) is a part of the
[Cellular Telephony
Architecture](/Reference/Core_Areas_and_APIs/Apps_and_MW/Telephony/Cellular_Telephony_Architecture)

The Mer cellular Telepathy implementation consists of Telepathy-glib,
Telepathy-qt, Telepathy-mission-control and Telepathy-ring.

The figure below gives an overview of the Telepathy framework.

Telepathy is a modular communications service provider with a unified
application protocol interface. Each supported protocol and each client
for each protocol is implemented as their own processes. The framework
consists of several modules used by Telepathy clients: Connection
managers, account managers, channel dispatchers.

Looking at the roles of the modules:

  - The connection managers implement the Telepathy support for the
    desired protocol and provide an interface for clients.
  - The account manager stores the Telepathy accounts and their
    parameters. It establishes the connection to account based on the
    account parameters or if requested by using the associated
    connection manager.
  - The channel dispatcher transmits the relevant type channels on the
    connections created by the account manager.

The channel types supported by Telepathy-qt and Telepathy-glib are
configured at build time to include:

  - Call
  - Contact List
  - Contact Search
  - DBus Tube
  - File Transfer
  - Room List
  - Server Authentication
  - Server TLS Connection
  - Stream\_Tube
  - Streamed Media
  - Text
  - Tubes

Note that Telepathy is technically defined as a set of D-Bus API
specifications so there is no single or reference Telepathy
implementation; different implementations exist for various high-level
language bindings such as Telepathy-glib or Telepathy-qt and there are
variations in implementation that can cause some interoperability
issues.

## Telepathy-glib

Telepathy-glib is a library for the Telepathy components using GLib (a
utility library for software written in C). It provides high-level
Telepathy GLib bindings for clients and service providers implemented
using the C-language.

One of the design decisions in this impelentations is that the
Telepathy-glib design stops the connection manager effectively whenever
no connection exists. Therefore, for the connection manager to remain
active, it needs to remain in a connected state. In the case of
Telepathy-ring, this is cumbersome because a modem connection through
oFono may come and go, especially in the case where USB modems are used.
Thus, the Telepathy-ring must always remain in a connected state even
when no modem connection exists.

## Telepathy-qt

Telepathy-qt is a library for Telepathy components using the Qt
framework. It provides Telepathy Qt bindings for clients and service
providers implemented with Qt C++.

## Telepathy-mission-control

Telepathy-mission-control handles accounts. When it starts, it loads or
creates accounts with each account having a protocol manager associated.
The account parameters are stored by Telepathy-mission-control. Using
the parameters it brings the account online by communicating with the
associated protocol manager, for example with Telepathy-ring.
Telepathy-mission-control acts as a channel dispatcher, which dispatches
incoming and outgoing communication channels to the relevant
applications. Telepathy-mission-control uses Telepathy-glib to provide
Telepathy bindings.

## Telepathy-ring

Telepathy-ring is a Telepathy cellular protocol manager handling an SMS
and a cellular voice call. Telepathy-ring provides support for a call
(for making cellular voice calls), an SMS (for sending, receiving, and
manipulating spooled SMS messages) and SIM (Subscriber Identity Module)
services (for accessing some SIM information).

Telepathy-ring consists of three main parts: The
Telepathy-mission-control plugin, the modem (ie the oFono interface),
and the connection manager itself. Telepathy-ring uses Telepathy-glib to
provide Telepathy bindings. Telepathy-ring’s Telepathy-mission-control
plugin sets the relevant properties and provides the relevant
functionality for Telepathy-mission-control to act as a Telepathy-ring
account manager. For example, Telepathy-ring’s Telepathy-mission-control
plugin sets the “ConnectAutomatically” property as “true” and because of
that Telepathy-mission-control will try to connect, ie: to start
Telepathy-ring whenever the “ConnectionStatus” property is disconnected.
