---
title: I18n
permalink: Reference/I18n/

---

## Internationalisation

All of the core components of Sailfish OS are fully internationalised,
including the Silica UI components as well as core Sailfish OS services
and applications. This means that the content of each application and
service can be localised to support some specific combination of
language, script, input method, and directionality, and that the user
experience of the core Sailfish OS services and applications are not
hardcoded to only support some specific region's requirements.

When writing new applications or services to contribute to Sailfish OS,
it is important to ensure that the contribution is internationalised, so
that all users of Sailfish OS can eventually benefit from it.

### Internationalised Text

All human-readable strings in an application or service need to be
embedded in such a way that they can be translated. In Sailfish OS
applications, the internationalisation capabilities of Qt are leveraged
to provide run-time translation of strings. This means that instead of
embedding the human-readable string directly in source code, instead the
code contains the identifier of a string, and at run-time the
appropriate (UTF-8) string (for that identifier, given the current
locale) is displayed.

In C++ the qtTrId() function should be used. The `lupdate` tool will
scan C++ code for uses of this function, and generate the appropriate
translation output files for the application or service. The qtTrId()
function should be used as follows:

`//: This is the context string, which describes to translators in which context the string will be displayed`  
`//% "This is the engineering-english translation, i.e., the string the developer would expect to see in an English localisation"`  
`const QString exampleString = qtTrId("example_internationalised_string_id");`

In QML the qsTrId() function should be used. The semantics are identical
to the qtTrId() function. An example of its use follows:

`Button {`  
`    //: This text will be displayed in a button, which when clicked will quit the application.`  
`    //% "Quit"`  
`    text: qsTrId("example_application-bt-quit")`  
`    onClicked: Qt.quit()`  
`}`

The qmake project (.pro) file must trigger lupdate to generate the
translation files. For example:

`# translations`  
`TS_FILE = $$OUT_PWD/$$TARGET.ts`  
`EE_QM = $$OUT_PWD/$$TARGET_eng_en.qm`  
  
`ts.commands += lupdate $$PWD -ts $$TS_FILE`  
`ts.CONFIG += no_check_exist`  
`ts.output = $$TS_FILE`  
`ts.input = .`  
  
`ts_install.files = $$TS_FILE`  
`ts_install.path = /usr/share/translations/source`  
`ts_install.CONFIG += no_check_exist`  
  
`engineering_english.commands += lrelease -idbased $$TS_FILE -qm $$EE_QM`  
`engineering_english.CONFIG += no_check_exist`  
`engineering_english.depends = ts`  
`engineering_english.input = $$TS_FILE`  
`engineering_english.output = $$EE_QM`  
  
`engineering_english_install.path = /usr/share/translations`  
`engineering_english_install.files = $$EE_QM`  
`engineering_english_install.CONFIG += no_check_exist`  
  
`QMAKE_EXTRA_TARGETS += ts engineering_english`  
`PRE_TARGETDEPS += ts engineering_english`  
`INSTALLS += ts_install engineering_english_install`

### Directionality

Some locales have specific requirements for directionality of content.
For example, in English-speaking locales, text and content should be
laid out left-to-right and top-to-bottom, however in some other locales
a different directionality is required (e.g., top-to-bottom then
left-to-right, or right-to-left). Some content will also need to be
mirrored (e.g., directional arrow images) when the layout is reversed.

Applications should be written so that the layout is internationalised,
by making use of the directionality support in Qt Quick, via the
horizontalAlignment, layoutMirroring, layoutDirection, and
effectiveLayoutDirection properties, and querying
Qt.application.layoutDirection to determine which alignment to use at
run-time (the value of which is determined from the layout direction
defined in the currently active translation file).

## Localisation

The people from a particular locale will often require the content they
consume to use some particular language, script, input methods,
directionality and layout. The act of generating the translated texts,
supporting the required scripts, implementing the locale-specific input
methods, and defining content layouts or directionality is called
localisation. Once the localisation tasks for a specific locale have
been completed, people from that locale will be able to use the
application or service more easily.

### Translations

The first step in localisation is usually defining translations for
every user-visible string in the application or UI. For core Sailfish OS
components and applications, the [Sailfish OS Translation
Tool](https://translate.sailfishos.org/) is used to define the
translation strings. For more information about how to use that tool,
please see the page on [Translating Sailfish
OS](/Develop/L10n).

The tool includes the translated string identifier, context description,
and engineering english text, for every user-visible string in Sailfish
OS. Translators can then contribute a new translation (or correction to
an existing translation) for that string, for the localisation they wish
to improve. The translation strings are added to the locale-specific
catalogue which is then indexed at build time, which applications read
from at run-time to display the appropriate translated string in the UI.

The translation file will also define the layout directionality (e.g.:
left-to-right and top-to-bottom; right-to-left and top-to-bottom; etc)
required for that locale.

### Input Methods

Different locales require different input methods. In some locales, a
QWERTY-layout virtual keyboard is the most common input method, but
other locales require different keyboard layouts, and in some locales
the most common input method is hand-writing-recognition.

Sailfish OS allows different input methods to be used on the device,
including virtual keyboards, physical keyboards, virtual handwriting
pads, and microphone input. The input method system used in Sailfish OS
is [Maliit](https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/maliit-framework) which
provides an extensible plugin architecture, allowing third-party input
method engines (such as from Nuance) to be installed into the system.

### Scripts

Different locales use different scripts for text content. These scripts
must be supported for displaying text and in the input method. Amongst
others, Sailfish OS currently supports the following scripts:

  - Latin
  - Cyrillic
  - Bokmål
  - Sanskrit

#### Fonts

To support a variety of languages and scripts, the fonts used in the
device must support the script used by the language. The standard font
on Sailfish OS is called Sail Sans Pro, but other fonts are supported on
the system and new fonts can be added to the font database when
required.

#### Directionality

Laying out text is a complicated process, involving kerning and
ligatures. The directionality of text layout also affects this process,
and is important that the application be localised appropriately with
respect to content layout and directionality in order to ensure that the
content is displayed appropriately.
