---
title: Romanian
permalink: Develop/L10n/Style_Guides/Romanian/

---

## "Subtitle" style

Romanian allows short and a long form of a word or expression, the
longer being often more "academic". Use the short form whenever
possible:

  - este -\> e
  - astăzi -\> azi
  - atunci când -\> când
  - cu 10 minute în urmă -\> acum 10 minute, de 10 minute
  - în imagine puteți vedea -\> în imagine vedeți, în imagine se vede
  - poți să <conjunctiv> -\> poți <infinitiv> ex - poți să deschizi -\>
    poți deschide
  - care se refera la -\> referitor la, privind
  - unul dintre obiecte -\> unul din obiecte, un obiect

# Grammar

For example:

  - Correct: **Deschide fișier**
  - Incorrect: **Deschide fișierul/un fișier**

For example:

  - Correct: **Utilizator, Invitat**
  - Incorrect: **Utilizatoare, Invitată**

## Tense

## The future tense versus the present tense

English future can be translated as future or present. The use of the
future tense will imply a logical consequence of something previously
mentioned. The use of the present will create a more direct style. E.g.:

  - Media player will allow you to select songs: Playerul (îți) permite
    să selecționezi cântece.

## Use of imperative

The instructions and commands addressed to the user should be translated
in the imperative. For example:

  - Use this area to select options that must be activated: Folosește
    această zonă pentru alegerea opțiunilor care trebuie activate.

## Modal verbs versus imperative

The literal translation of “could”, “should”, “may” and “might” using
the conditional should be avoided. These forms should be replaced by the
present tense. For example:

  - Determine which file should be installed on your system: Determină
    ce fișier trebuie instalat pe sistem

For example:

  - Correct: **Crează configurarea contului în...**
  - Incorrect: **Configurarea contului e creată în...**

For example:

  - Correct: **Go to Settings**
  - Incorrect: **User goes to Settings**

# Punctuation

## Use of punctuation signs

In Romanian commas, periods, colons, semicolons, question and
exclamation marks, suspension points - follow immediately the character
preceding them. For example:

  - Correct: **Vrei să continui?**
  - Incorrect: **Vrei să continui ?**

Opening and closing quotes, brackets, etc. stick to the included part
without space.

  - Correct: **Salvează (fără schimbarea numelui)**
  - Incorrect: **Salvează( fără schimbarea numelui )**

After period, comma, exclamation and question mark there should only be
one space. Comma: In the enumerations separated by commas, the last
element is normally preceded by a conjunction. Do not use a comma before
this conjunction. Colon: After a colon, lower case is generally used,
except where the sentence is a quote, a proper name, or where more than
one sentence follow the colon

## Hyphenation

Hyphenate in object-verbal noun compounds.

  - Correct: **read-only file**
  - Incorrect: **read only file** or **readonly file**

## Independent clauses

\= Use a comma between independent clauses joined by and, but, and or.

  - Example: **To open Account, go to Settings, and create new.**

## Diacritics

Use Romanian diacritics and symbols. Bellow there's a list of (char -\>
unicode) correspondences:

  - î -\> U00EE
  - Î -\> U00CE
  - â -\> U00E2
  - Â -\> U00C2
  - ă -\> U0103
  - Ă -\> U0102
  - ș (cu virgulă) -\> U0219
  - Ș (cu virgulă) -\> U0218
  - ț (cu virgulă) -\> U021B
  - Ț (cu virgulă) -\> U021A
  - – (ndash) -\> U2013 Ex. București–Pitești, 14:00–15:00

## Quotation marks

English quotes must be replaced with the „ for opening and ” for closing
(„99 down” and „99 up”, respectively). The « and » (French chevrons)
must only be used when a quotation has to be made within another
quotation.

  - „ -\> U201E (99 down)
  - ” -\> U201D (99 up) Ex: „Un citat”, no spaces between quoted text
    and quotes
  - « -\> U00AB
  - » -\> U00BB Ex: „O idee «creață»”

## Series

Use a comma to separate elements in a series, except before the last
element - usually introduced by a conjunction.

  - Correct: **Crează, modifică și șterge**
  - Incorrect: **Crează, modifică, și șterge**

Use a semicolon to separate items in a series when one or more items
have internal punctuation.

Only the first word of a heading must be capitalised. Following words
preserve their capitalisation rules (names are Capitalised, etc)

# Numerals

For example:

  - Correct: **1 mesaj primit**
  - Incorrect: **Un mesaj primit**

Use metric units. Use a non breaking space between the numeral and the
unit, including degree and percentage sign. Their abbreviations should
not be followed by a full stop (see Abbreviations too)

# Terminology
