---
title: Cellular Data Connections
permalink: Reference/Core_Areas_and_APIs/Apps_and_MW/Telephony/Cellular_Data_Connections/

---

Cellular Data Connections is a part of the [Cellular Telephony
Architecture](/Reference/Core_Areas_and_APIs/Apps_and_MW/Telephony/Cellular_Telephony_Architecture)

## Cellular Data Connections

ConnMan is the main daemon managing network connections from multiple
technologies, both wired and wireless, (such as WiFi, Bluetooth, USB and
Cellular) used in mobile devices. It offers a high-level D-Bus API for
use by networking applications.

It supports different technologies through a plugin design similar to
oFono's. This modular design makes ConnMan extendable, ie: support for
new connection technologies can be added. Besides new technologies,
extensions for various services can also be implemented as plugins, such
as configuration methods like DHCP (Dynamic Host Communication Protocol)
and domain name resolution.

The desired plugins can be enabled/disabled and configured at runtime
using a configuration file. The file can, for example, define the
preference order of technologies and a list of network interfaces that
will not be handled by ConnMan.

ConnMan plugins are also configured at compile time and using a
build-time configuration and options, amongst which is the possibility
to exclude built-in plugins, such as WiFi.

ConnMan uses oFono as a cellular technology provider and ConnMan’s oFono
support is, naturally, implemented by an oFono plugin. ConnMan tracks
the oFono daemon as it starts, stops and restarts.

Libconnman-qt consists of two libraries that provide access to the
Connman D-Bus interfaces as Qt bindings and a plugin for QML
applications. These bindings are a direct reflection of the interfaces
provided by Connman.

Nemo-qml-plugin-connectivity is a dynamically loadable custom Mer QML
extension plugin for QML networking/connectivity applications using
TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol / Internet Protocol). It uses
Libconnman-qt for communicating with ConnMan to provide the required
services.

The main purpose of ConnectionAgent is to provide a daemon and a plugin
library for QML applications to access ConnMan’s Agent interface, ie:
“net.connman.Agent”, using the UserAgent class provided by the
Libconnman-qt library. ConnectionAgent also provides support for the
ConnMan “autoconnect” feature to turn the connection/networking
technology power on if the corresponding ConnMan service has
“autoconnect” set to as “True”.

Provisioning-service is used for Over the Air (OTA) provisioning, ie:
using the operator provided data coming as a push message to initialise
oFono Internet data and MMS (Multimedia Messaging Service) data
contexts. The data is first received by oFono, which recognizes it as a
push message and forwards it to the Provisioning-service to be further
processed. Based on the received data, the Provisioning-service then
initializes the oFono data and MMS contexts. After processing the data,
the Provisioning-service emits a signal expressing the result
(“apnProvisioningSucceeded”, “apnProvisioningPartiallySucceeded”,
“apnProvisioningFailed”). It is not mandatory to include the
Provisioning-service into an operating system. It only automates the
provisioning of the MMS and Internet connections. In a mobile phone
using an operating system that contains the Mer, the same data can be
provided by the end-user through the UI application.
