---
title: Contacts
permalink: Reference/Core_Areas_and_APIs/Apps_and_MW/Contacts/

---

## Contacts

Sailfish OS provides features to store and manage contact data,
synchronize with online contact storage services, and transfer contacts
between devices.

Contact information is highly personal and confidential. Sailfish OS is
designed so that contact data from different sources are separated at
the database level, with strict synchronization policies to ensure user
privacy.

### API

The contacts stack in Sailfish OS includes several API components. All
of the native API components are fully open-source.

#### Platform API

Sailfish OS uses the QtPIM QtContacts API as its platform API. The Qt
Project has not officially released Qt Contacts as a module within Qt,
as it is still in development phase. As such, it is not offered as an
available API for native application developers at this point in time.
This will change in the future, once Sailfish OS is able to upgrade to a
later version of Qt.

The latest upstream version of the QtPIM API can be found at:
<http://code.qt.io/cgit/qt/qtpim.git/>

#### UI Layer API

Various shortcomings in the QML bindings within the QtPIM API means that
another API is needed by Sailfish OS at the presentation layer, and so
one was developed. Some other API enhancements (including data cache,
localisation and internationalisation enablers, and other utility
capabilities) are also included. This API is not available for
third-party developers, and eventually most of the functionality should
be upstreamed into the QtPIM API where appropriate (although some is
platform-specific and will always be separate).

These APIs can be found at:
<https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/nemo-qml-plugin-contacts> and
<https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/libcontacts> Note: the separation
between these two projects is historical and artificial. They should be
combined into a single repository.

Some components of the Sailfish OS contacts API, such as the Contacts
Browser page, are not open source software. They are distributed in the
sailfish-components-contacts-qt5 package.

#### Android Compatibility

Contact data is shared with Android applications which have been
approved by the user, via a device-local bridge database. Contact data
is synchronized with that bridge database periodically. Some contact
data from the native contacts database may not be synchronized to the
bridge database (if, for example, the terms and conditions of the
service from which the data originated prohibit that). Contact data
which is synchronized to the bridge database is available to Android
applications which have been granted permission to access via the normal
Android APIs.

### Storage And Middleware

Sailfish OS includes a variety of middleware pieces related to the
contacts domain, and specific storage and synchronization
implementations for the platform.

#### Storage Backend

The data storage backend used by Sailfish OS is an implementation of the
QtPIM QContactManagerEngine interface, using sqlite3 as its storage
database. It also provides various extensions to the QtPIM API
specifically to enable synchronization.

The implementation of this backend can be found at:
<https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/qtcontacts-sqlite> Note that
various improvements to the backend are planned for when Sailfish OS
upgrades to the latest version of the QtPIM API, including better
support for separated addressbook collections.

#### Synchronization

As with other data-related domains, synchronization of contact data is
controlled by Buteo (the synchronization framework used in Sailfish OS).
Synchronization with a variety of data sources is supported through a
number of data-source-specific synchronization plugins. Each plugin is
independent, although many of them share significant amounts of code to
ease maintenance.

The Jolla forks of the Buteo core libraries are:

  - [buteo-syncfw](https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/buteo-syncfw)
  - [buteo-syncml](https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/buteo-syncml)
  - [buteo-mtp](https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/buteo-mtp)

The various synchronization plugins are listed below:

  - CardDAV:
    <https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/buteo-sync-plugin-carddav>
  - Google:
    <https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/buteo-sync-plugins-social/tree/master/src/google/google-contacts>
  - VKontakte:
    <https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/buteo-sync-plugins-social/tree/master/src/vk/vk-contacts>
  - Telepathy/IM: <https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/contactsd>
  - SyncML (over Bluetooth or HTTP):
    <https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/buteo-sync-plugins/tree/master/clientplugins/syncmlclient>
  - Proprietary synchronization plugins (e.g. for Microsoft Exchange
    ActiveSync) also exist but are not open-source.

### Contribution

Community or third-party contributions to various components of the
contacts stack in Sailfish OS is encouraged and appreciated. The vast
majority of the components are open-source, and the developers of the
components actively monitor issues raised within the Sailfish OS gitlab
instance (https://git.sailfishos.org/), and are also available in IRC
(\#sailfishos@freenode) and via email.

Some ideas for ways to contribute include:

  - test accounts / servers for testing CardDAV synchronization
  - test robots to perform smoke testing for synchronization plugins
  - test data for specification conformance, for all synchronization
    plugins
  - complete unit tests for synchronization plugin behaviour correctness
    (C++ proficiency required)
  - performance improvements (algorithm or datastructure knowledge and
    C++ proficiency required)
  - storage backend improvements (including helping with the
    implementation of the new features required in the latest version of
    the QtPIM API)
  - documentation improvements

For in-depth information about contributing to the CardDAV
synchronisation plugin, please see [CalDAV and CardDAV Community
Contributions](/Develop/Collaborative_Development/CalDAV_and_CardDAV_Community_Contributions).
