---
title: Russian
permalink: Develop/L10n/Style_Guides/Russian/

---

# Basics of good writing style

  - Write in impersonal style, that does not involve users. Use industry
    standard forms to maintain the highest quality:
      - Correct: **Выбор из музыкальных файлов.**
      - Incorrect: **Выбери из музыкальных файлов.**
  - Make sure the text is consistent and clear and correct in grammar
    and spelling.
  - Write in short sentences.
  - Use a positive tone, avoid negative expressions.
  - Avoid ambiguity. Make sure that pronouns point clearly to the
    relevant nouns, and avoid long strings of modifiers or nouns.

Remember that the most important part is delivering a clear message.

Note that in technical writing, descriptions and instructions should not
include text that is written from a marketing point of view.

# Grammar

## Person

Be formal in all cases. Please avoid gender-specific language, as well
as avoid using pronouns. Yet if otherwise impossible, use the second
person plural formal pronoun «вы».

Keep addressing consistent: e.g. if a paragraph was started using the
second person, retain it throughout all its sentences (as opposed to
switching to third person or neutral mood).

## Tense

Use the present tense. E.g.:

  - Correct: **Потребуется перезапуск**
  - Incorrect: **Твой телефон перезапустится**

For example:

  - Correct: **Выберите Удалить все, чтобы удалить сохраненные
    сообщения**
  - Incorrect: **Сохраненные сообщения удаляются с помощью опции Удалить
    все**

For example:

  - Correct: **Переход к настройкам**
  - Incorrect: **Перейди к настройкам**

# Punctuation

In case of Russian language, where possible, avoid using abbreviated
forms unless they are widely recognised.

Use common abbreviations and acronyms as regular entries and use «см.»
references to them from their expanded forms. Use «см. также» references
when you want to direct the reader to related information.

When you need to explain English abbreviation or acronym, which has no
equivalent in Russian, give your explanation in parentheses when you
first introduce the abbreviation or acronym.

## Hyphenation

If there is a need of dash make sure to use em-dash (Alt+0151). Do not
confuse it with the hyphen (-).

A dash is longer and has a space before and after it. Using dash instead
of hyphen and vice-versa is an error.

En-dash is rarely used in Russian. Instead, please use em-dash in the
following situations:

  - **1917 — 2013**
  - **100 — 150**

Hyphen is used in phone numbers: **тел. 5-13-43**

Hyphen is also used in syllabic hyphenation of the Russian words.

## Independent clauses

Use a comma between independent clauses joined by and if you logically
can substitute «и» with «а»:

  - **Данные первого контакта объединяются с данными второго контакта, и
    первый контакт более не отображается в списке контактов.**

## Series

Use a comma to separate elements in a series, except for the last two
elements: **Создать, изменить и удалить**.

Use a semicolon to separate items in a series when one or more items
have internal punctuation.

For technical writing in Russian: use «» quotation marks instead of ‘’
or “”. If necessary, please use curly quotation marks as inner quotation
marks. Please, keep consistency in this particular subject throughout
the whole text.

# Numerals

## Numbers

Write numbers as digits, including numbers below 10.

  - Correct: **Получено 1 новое сообщение**
  - Incorrect: **Получено одно новое сообщение**

Please consult the State system for ensuring the uniformity of
measurements (edition ГОСТ 8.417-2002) to use correct spacing with the
units of measurement.

# Terminology
