---
title: DRAFT-Sailfish X Xperia XA2 Build and Flash
permalink: Develop/HW_Adaptation/DRAFT-Sailfish_X_Xperia_XA2_Build_and_Flash/

---

# Sailfish OS Hardware Adaptation Development Kit for Sony Xperia XA2

Here you will find instructions how to build Sailfish OS image and flash
it to Sony Xperia XA2 device.

## ChangeLog

  - 2020-06-16: Align with the latest build scripts
  - 2019-03-15: More community contributions taken in to de-clutter the
    build process, and align with HADK 3.0.1
  - 2019-03-05: Cleaned up packages that do not gracefully install under
    the Platform SDK target, thanks to community's contributions to the
    helper build scripts\!
  - 2019-03-01: Adapt from Xperia X flash and build instructions

## Building

Please download the latest Sailfish OS HADK (Hardware Adaptation
Development Kit) from within [this link](https://sailfishos.org/hadk).

If used previously, you'll need to re-install/update your build
environment to Sailfish OS Platform SDK 3.0.0 (or newer), delete old
target and tooling, and create new target and tooling, just like HADK
\>=v3 instructs.

If you are new to HADK, please carefully read the disclaimer on page 1,
then **chapters 1 and 2**.

The disk space requirement for this build is not 16GB as HADK says, but
around 90GB . The download bandwidth requirement is around 30GB.

HADK uses CyanogenMod as reference base. Here we'll instead have Sony's
stock Android (8.1.x). Now you can read through **chapter 3** of the
HADK.

If you ever run into difficulties, we're there to help in the
[\#sailfishos-porters](http://webchat.freenode.net/?channels=#sailfishos-porters)
channel on IRC at Freenode.

In **chapter 4** (*Setting up the SDKs*) setup the environment in
\~/.hadk.env with additional variables (here we'll build for Sony Xperia
XA2 Dual SIM variant):

`export VENDOR=sony`  
`export DEVICE=h4113`  
`export HABUILD_DEVICE=pioneer`  
`export FAMILY=nile`  
`export BRANCH=8.1.0_r52`  
`export HAVERSION="sony-aosp-"$BRANCH"_20190206"`

Follow through the **chapter 4** until the end, and **ignore chapter
5**, instead perform the following:

`HABUILD_SDK $`  
  
`git config --global user.name "Your Name"`  
`git config --global user.email "you@example.com"`

At this point, install Android's repo tool:
<https://source.android.com/source/downloading#installing-repo>. Then

`HABUILD_SDK $`  
  
`sudo apt-get install libssl-dev`  
`sudo mkdir -p $ANDROID_ROOT`  
`sudo chown -R $USER $ANDROID_ROOT`  
`cd $ANDROID_ROOT`  
`repo init -u `<git://github.com/mer-hybris/android.git>` -b hybris-$HAVERSION -m tagged-manifest.xml`  
`# Adjust X to your bandwidth capabilities`  
`repo sync -jX --fetch-submodules`  
`source build/envsetup.sh`  
`export USE_CCACHE=1`  
`lunch aosp_$DEVICE-user`  
`git clone `<https://github.com/sailfishos/droidmedia>` external/droidmedia`  
`make -j$(nproc --all) hybris-hal droidmedia`

If you encounter errors, check with HADK's section 5.5 "Common
Pitfalls", and if it's not there, ask us on IRC.

Once you have hybris-boot.img and hybris-recovery.img files successfully
built, go through **chapter 6** of the HADK document.

Ignore **chapter 7**, but do the following instead:

`PLATFORM_SDK $`  
  
`cd $ANDROID_ROOT`  
`sudo zypper ref`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --droid-hal`  
`git clone --recursive `<https://github.com/mer-hybris/droid-config-sony-$FAMILY>` hybris/droid-configs -b master`  
`if [ -z "$(grep community_adaptation $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/rpm/droid-config-$DEVICE.spec)" ]; then`  
`  sed -i '/%include droid-configs-device/i%define community_adaptation 1\n' $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/rpm/droid-config-$DEVICE.spec`  
`fi`  
`if [ -z "$(grep patterns-sailfish-consumer-generic $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/patterns/jolla-configuration-$DEVICE.yaml)" ]; then`  
`  sed -i "/Summary: Jolla Configuration $DEVICE/i- patterns-sailfish-consumer-generic\n- pattern:sailfish-porter-tools\n" $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/patterns/jolla-configuration-$DEVICE.yaml`  
`fi`  
`if [ -z "$(grep jolla-devicelock-daemon-encsfa $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/patterns/jolla-hw-adaptation-$HABUILD_DEVICE.yaml)" ]; then`  
`  sed -i "s/sailfish-devicelock-fpd/jolla-devicelock-daemon-encsfa/" $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/patterns/jolla-hw-adaptation-$HABUILD_DEVICE.yaml`  
`  sed -i "/Obsoletes: jolla-devicelock-[a-z]*-encsfa/d" $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/droid-config-common.inc`  
`fi`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --configs`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --mw # select "all" option when asked`

After all's built, proceed with:

`PLATFORM_SDK $`  
  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --gg`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_bootimg_packages.sh`  
`sb2 -t $VENDOR-$DEVICE-$PORT_ARCH -m sdk-install -R zypper in --force-resolution droid-hal-$HABUILD_DEVICE-kernel-modules`  
`git clone --recursive `<https://github.com/mer-hybris/droid-hal-img-boot-sony-$FAMILY>` hybris/mw/droid-hal-img-boot-sony-$FAMILY`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --mw=`<https://github.com/mer-hybris/droid-hal-img-boot-sony-$FAMILY>` --do-not-install --spec=rpm/droid-hal-$HABUILD_DEVICE-img-boot.spec`  
  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --mw=`<https://github.com/mer-hybris/droid-system-sony-$FAMILY-$HABUILD_DEVICE>` --do-not-install --spec=rpm/droid-system-$HABUILD_DEVICE.spec --spec=rpm/droid-system-$HABUILD_DEVICE-$DEVICE.spec`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --mw=`<https://github.com/mer-hybris/droid-vendor-sony-$FAMILY-$HABUILD_DEVICE>` --do-not-install --spec=rpm/droid-system-vendor-$HABUILD_DEVICE.spec --spec=rpm/droid-system-vendor-$HABUILD_DEVICE-$DEVICE.spec`  
  
`git clone --recursive `<https://github.com/mer-hybris/droid-hal-version-sony-$FAMILY>` hybris/droid-hal-version-$DEVICE`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --version`

Next, please proceed with:

`PLATFORM_SDK $`  
  
`export RELEASE=3.3.0.16`  
`export EXTRA_NAME=-my1`  
`sudo zypper in lvm2 atruncate pigz`  
`sudo zypper in android-tools`  
`cd $ANDROID_ROOT`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --mic`

If you want to rebuild your image again later, umount any
`/var/tmp/mic/imgcreate-*/` mounts manually.

The command above will yield a flashable archive, such as
`$ANDROID_ROOT/sfe-h4113-3.3.0.16-my1/Sailfish_OS--my1-3.3.0.16-h4113-0.0.1.1.zip`
that you will use to flash your device as explained in the next section.

## Flashing

All the instructions you will find on our website (yet use your own
built .zip bundle\!):
<https://jolla.com/sailfishx-linux-instructions-xa2/>

Note: in `flash.sh` you will need to replace `@DEVICES@` with your
`$DEVICE` value in uppercase, e.g. `H4113`. Naturally, after that you'll
need to adjust or remove the line containing `flash.sh` in the `md5.lst`
file.

## Feedback

If you find bugs while building an image from this wiki, please report
them in our IRC channel.

  
Have fun and enjoy our first fully-flashable Sailfish OS image built by
you\!  
Your Jolla HW Team
