---
title: Sailfish_X_Xperia_Android_6_Build_and_Flash
permalink: Develop/HW_Adaptation/Sailfish_X_Xperia_Android_6_Build_and_Flash/

---

# Sailfish OS Hardware Adaptation Development Kit for Sony Xperia X

Here you will find instructions how to build Sailfish OS image and flash
it to Sony Xperia X (F5121) device.

## ChangeLog

  - 2020-06-16: Align with the latest build scripts
  - 2019-03-15: Revised in the wake of HADK 3.0.1
  - 2018-12-13: Revised in the wake of HADK and Platform SDK 3.0.0
  - 2018-06-25: Aligned with Platform SDK 2.2.0 and target
  - 2017-11-02: droid-flashing-tools has now been provided in
    nemo:devel:hw:common repo (which is automaticaly available for local
    builds), which should unbreak mic image creation
  - 2017-10-11: EDGE variable added for cutting and bleeding flavours of
    the HW adaptation (removed in Jun '18 due to adaptation now being
    stable)
  - 2017-10-10: Switching to blobless builds, you no longer have to
    download SW binaries to build things, will only need them to flash
    the image **(we recommend to start your dev environment from scratch
    at this point)**
  - 2017-10-07: Each `repo init` below now points to the
    `tagged-manifest.xml`, which means a complete re-init, re-sync, and
    rebuild is required to fix the recent mobile data issue.
  - 2017-09-29: Bluetooth is now enabled, you are welcome to test its
    profiles and fix up as many as you can (ping `jusa` in IRC for
    guidance).  
    Browser video playback fixed.  
    Camera video recording fixed.  
    General performance boosted by enabling all 6 CPU cores.
  - 2017-09-26: droid-configs has been updated to fix the `nothing
    provides requested droid-hal-version-f5121` error

## Building

Please download the latest Sailfish OS HADK (Hardware Adaptation
Development Kit) from within [this link](https://sailfishos.org/hadk).

If used previously, you'll need to re-install/update your build
environment to Sailfish OS Platform SDK 3.0.0 (or newer), delete old
target, and create new target, just like HADK \>=v3 instructs.

If you are new to HADK, please carefully read the disclaimer on page 1,
then **chapters 1 and 2**.

The disk space requirement for this build is not 30GB as HADK says, but
around 80GB. The download bandwidth requirement is around 20GB.

HADK uses CyanogenMod as reference base. Here we'll instead have Sony's
stock Android 6.0.1 or 7.x – these are the versions that are supported
by Sailfish X and need to be flashed to your Sony before flashing
Sailfish OS image. Now you can read through **chapter 3**.

If you ever run into difficulties, we're there to help in the
[\#sailfishos-porters](http://webchat.freenode.net/?channels=#sailfishos-porters)
channel on IRC at Freenode.

In **chapter 4** (*Setting up the SDKs*) setup the environment in
\~/.hadk.env with additional variables (here we'll build for Sony Xperia
X single SIM variant):

`export VENDOR=sony`  
`export DEVICE=f5121`  
`export HABUILD_DEVICE=suzu`  
`export DEVICE_GROUP=f512x`  
`export BRANCH=6.0.1_r80`  
`export HAVERSION="sony-aosp-"$BRANCH"-20170902"`

Follow through the **chapter 4** until the end, and **ignore chapter
5**, instead perform the following:

`HABUILD_SDK $`  
  
`git config --global user.name "Your Name"`  
`git config --global user.email "you@example.com"`

At this point, install Android's repo tool:
<https://source.android.com/source/downloading#installing-repo>. Then

`HABUILD_SDK $`  
  
`sudo mkdir -p $ANDROID_ROOT`  
`sudo chown -R $USER $ANDROID_ROOT`  
`cd $ANDROID_ROOT`  
`repo init -u `<git://github.com/mer-hybris/android.git>` -b hybris-$HAVERSION -m tagged-manifest.xml`  
`# Adjust X to your bandwidth capabilities`  
`repo sync -jX --fetch-submodules`  
`source build/envsetup.sh`  
`export USE_CCACHE=1`  
`lunch aosp_$DEVICE-userdebug`  
`git clone `<https://github.com/sailfishos/droidmedia>` external/droidmedia`  
`make -j$(nproc --all) hybris-hal droidmedia`

If you encounter errors, check with HADK's section 5.5 "Common
Pitfalls", and if it's not there, ask us on IRC.

Once you have hybris-boot.img and hybris-recovery.img files successfully
built, go through **chapter 6** of the HADK document.

Ignore **chapter 7**, but do the following instead:

`PLATFORM_SDK $`  
  
`cd $ANDROID_ROOT`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --droid-hal`  
`git clone --recursive `<https://github.com/mer-hybris/droid-config-$DEVICE>` hybris/droid-configs -b master`  
`if [ -z "$(grep community_adaptation $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/rpm/droid-config-$DEVICE.spec)" ]; then`  
`  sed -i '/%include droid-configs-device/i%define community_adaptation 1\n' $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/rpm/droid-config-$DEVICE.spec`  
`fi`  
`if [ -z "$(grep patterns-sailfish-consumer-generic $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/patterns/jolla-configuration-$DEVICE.yaml)" ]; then`  
`  sed -i "/Summary: Jolla Configuration $DEVICE/i- patterns-sailfish-consumer-generic\n- pattern:sailfish-porter-tools\n" $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/patterns/jolla-configuration-$DEVICE.yaml`  
`fi`  
`if [ -z "$(grep jolla-devicelock-daemon-encsfa $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/patterns/jolla-hw-adaptation-$DEVICE_GROUP.yaml)" ]; then`  
`  sed -i "s/sailfish-devicelock-fpd/jolla-devicelock-daemon-encsfa/" $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/patterns/jolla-hw-adaptation-$DEVICE_GROUP.yaml`  
`fi`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --configs`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --mw # select "all" option when asked`

Wait for middleware to finish, open new terminal window shell and enter:

`HABUILD_SDK $`  
  
`sudo apt-get install rsync`  
`cd $ANDROID_ROOT/..`  
`mkdir syspart`  
`cd syspart`  
`repo init -u `<git://github.com/mer-hybris/android.git>` -b syspart-$HAVERSION -m tagged-manifest.xml`  
`# Adjust X to your bandwidth capabilities`  
`repo sync -jX --fetch-submodules`  
`source build/envsetup.sh`  
`export USE_CCACHE=1`  
`lunch aosp_$DEVICE-userdebug`  
`# Change $(nproc --all) to your building capabilities, it will be very heavy on RAM if you go for more cores, proceed with care:`  
`make -j$(nproc --all)  libnfc-nci bluetooth.default_32 systemtarball`  
`# The build might take quite a bit of time`

`PLATFORM_SDK $`  
  
`cd $ANDROID_ROOT/../syspart`  
`git clone `<https://github.com/mer-hybris/droid-system-$DEVICE>  
`mb2 -t $VENDOR-$DEVICE-$PORT_ARCH -s droid-system-$DEVICE/rpm/droid-system-$DEVICE.spec build`  
`rm -f $ANDROID_ROOT/droid-local-repo/$DEVICE/droid-system-*.rpm`  
`mv RPMS/droid-system-*-0.1.1-1.armv7hl.rpm $ANDROID_ROOT/droid-local-repo/$DEVICE/`  
`createrepo_c "$ANDROID_ROOT/droid-local-repo/$DEVICE"`  
`sb2 -t $VENDOR-$DEVICE-$PORT_ARCH -m sdk-install -R zypper ref`

Close the current terminal window, go back to previous window, then:

`PLATFORM_SDK $`  
  
`cd $ANDROID_ROOT`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --gg `  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_bootimg_packages.sh`  
`sb2 -t $VENDOR-$DEVICE-$PORT_ARCH -m sdk-install -R zypper in --force-resolution droid-hal-$DEVICE-kernel-modules`  
`git clone --recursive `<https://github.com/mer-hybris/droid-hal-img-boot-$DEVICE>` hybris/mw/droid-hal-img-boot-$DEVICE`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --mw=`<https://github.com/mer-hybris/droid-hal-img-boot-$DEVICE>  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --mw=`<https://github.com/mer-hybris/bluetooth-rfkill-event>` --spec=rpm/bluetooth-rfkill-event-hciattach.spec`  
  
`git clone --recursive `<https://github.com/mer-hybris/droid-hal-version-$DEVICE>` hybris/droid-hal-version-$DEVICE`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --version`

Next, please proceed with:

`PLATFORM_SDK $`  
  
`export RELEASE=3.3.0.16`  
`export EXTRA_NAME=-my1`  
`sudo zypper in lvm2 atruncate pigz`  
`sudo zypper in android-tools`  
`cd $ANDROID_ROOT`  
`rpm/dhd/helpers/build_packages.sh --mic`

If you want to rebuild your image again later, umount any
`/var/tmp/mic/imgcreate-*/` mounts manually.

## Flashing

Ensure you OTA your stock Sony Android to at least 34.3.A.0.228 (check
Settings | About phone | Build number) before unlocking your device, so
you do not need Windows in the flashing process. Note, you might need to
OTA-update several times to reach that version.

`PLATFORM_SDK $   # continue from above mic session`  
  
`mkdir flashing`  
`cd flashing`  
`unzip $ANDROID_ROOT/sfe-$DEVICE-$RELEASE$EXTRA_NAME/Sailfish OS-*.zip`  
`cd Sailfish OS-*/`

Download Sony vendor zip archive from
<https://developer.sonymobile.com/downloads/software-binaries/software-binaries-for-aosp-marshmallow-android-6-0-1-kernel-3-10-loire/>
and place it in current directory, then:

`BLOBS=$(ls -1 *_loire.zip | tail -n1)`  
`unzip $BLOBS`  
`# act upon instructions in the flashing-README.txt, then:`  
`bash ./flash.sh`

### If flash.sh fails with "You have too old Sony Android version (X.Y) on your device"

This means you have not updated your stock Sony Android via OTA to the
build 34.3.A.0.228. Since you have already unlocked your device, OTAs
are no longer available, and now you have two alternatives: the Linux
way or Windows.

#### The Linux Way

`cd $ANDROID_ROOT/flashing/Sailfish OS-*/`  
`MATCH='Your Sony Android version ($VMAJOR.$VMINOR) on your device is too old,'`  
`LINE=$(grep -n "$MATCH" flash.sh | sed 's/:.*//')`  
`if [ -n $LINE ]; then`  
`  sed -i "$(($LINE+1)),$(($LINE+3)) d" flash.sh`  
`  sed -i "s/$MATCH/Your Sony Android version is too old, but we'll workaround that via Linux cmdline/" flash.sh`  
`else`  
`  echo 'Ensure you are using droid-configs from the build instructions above (same branch/up-to-date), then:'`  
`  echo 'cp $ANDROID_ROOT/hybris/droid-configs/sparse/boot/flash.sh .'`  
`  echo 'And restart this section from its beginning above ^ (cd $ANDROID_ROOT/flashing etc)'`  
`fi`  
`sed -i 's/echo "Flashing oem partition.."/echo "oem partition is populated manually through recovery"/' flash.sh`  
`sed -i 's/$FLASHCMD oem $BLOBS/#$FLASHCMD oem $BLOBS/' flash.sh`  
`fastboot flash system *_loire.img`

Open a new terminal window and enter
[Sailfish\_X\_Build\_and\_Flash\#Recovery\_Mode](/Develop/HW_Adaptation/Sailfish_X_Xperia_Android_6_Build_and_Flash)
and shell into the device, then:

`mkdir oem`  
`mount /dev/mmcblk0p28 oem`  
`mkdir blobs`  
`mount /dev/mmcblk0p52 system`  
`rm -rf oem/*`  
`cp -ar blobs/* oem`  
`umount oem`  
`umount blobs`  
`rmdir oem blobs`  
`exit`

Go back to your previous terminal window session, and complete the
flashing:

`bash ./flash.sh`

Now reboot the device and you should have Sailfish OS booting normally.

#### Windows

  - Download the Emma tool -
    <https://developer.sonymobile.com/open-devices/flash-tool/how-to-download-and-install-the-flash-tool/>
  - Install the Emma tool
  - Connect phone to your computer with USB cable, while holding volume
    down and then green LED light should be lit on the top speaker
  - Update your device to at least to Android version x-x\_34.3.x.x.x
    with the Emma tool.  
    NOTE: The download size can be 2.5G and take tens of minutes to
    download so go and get some coffee in the mean while

Go back to your Linux installation where you left off previously, and
redo:

`# act upon instructions in the flashing-README.txt, then:`  
`bash ./flash.sh`

## Recovery Mode

If anything goes not according to plan, you can boot the device into
fastboot (VolumeUp+Power) and execute this command:

`PLATFORM_SDK $`  
  
`# cd into your flashing/ directory`  
`sudo fastboot boot Sailfish OS-*/hybris-recovery.img`

Then follow instructions on screen to SSH into your device recovery
mode. Further steps will depend on what you want to achieve, mainly
guided by our IRC channel.

## Adaptation Status

The port is pretty functional, but help from you is always appreciated
in these areas:

  - Sensors not working: fingerprint, barometer, step counter
  - Double-tap to wake is deactivated. Activate it and help testing in
    various scenarios by:

`mcetool --set-doubletap-wakeup=proximity`

  - FM radio missing (solution is known by community)
  - No big.LITTLE technology is currently enabled, Sailfish OS simply
    fills up the cores in sequence (from 0 to 3 little, then the big
    ones 4 and 5), which already gives a very smooth performance.  
    However, this means there's no special allocation of the two
    performance cores for the foreground apps (so the UX experience
    could be improved even further, even under heavy loads). More
    details:  
    We can't dedicate two big cores to foreground UI apps because we
    can't allocate PIDs to the foreground sets. And even if we could,
    we'd have to add the root process for foreground apps (SFOS
    booster/invoker?) into there so its children would live on the fast
    cores. Ping abranson on IRC if you want to chip in, or wait for
    Android 7 (and kernel v4.4 automatically handling all that much
    better) where only SFOS booster part will need sorting.
  - Startup Wizard skips one blank page (where usually the Android
    Support is)

If you find more things to fix, please report them in our IRC channel or
file a
[bug](https://bugs.merproject.org/enter_bug.cgi?product=Mer%20Hybris&Bugzilla_restrictlogin=on&GoAheadAndLogIn=Log%20in&component=Sony%20Xperia%20X).

  
Have fun and enjoy our first fully-flashable Sailfish OS image built
entirely by you\!  
Your Jolla HW Team
