---
title: Calendar
permalink: Reference/Core_Areas_and_APIs/Apps_and_MW/Calendar/

---

## Calendar

The Calendar system in Sailfish OS allows users to view, create, and
share calendar events, and to schedule reminders for various events.
Event information from a variety of sources is separated in the database
into distinct calendar collections.

### API

The Calendar stack in Sailfish OS includes several API components. All
of the native API components are fully open-source.

#### Platform API

Sailfish OS currently uses the mKCal extensions to the KCalCore API as
its platform API. Sailfish OS is currently the defacto upstream for
mKCal, which was open-sourced by Nokia previously, while KCalCore is a
well-maintained KDE API.

There are plans in the future to switch to using the QtPIM QtOrganizer
API as the platform API, however this requires three steps: first, an
mKCal backend for the QtOrganizer API could be written during the
transition phase; second, an sqlite-based QtOrganizer backend could be
implemented directly; finally, the QtProject would need to release the
QtPIM API in an official release. At this stage, the platform API is not
available to third-party developers to use in native applications, due
to the plan to switch to the QtPIM API in the future.

The KCalCore repository can be found at:
<https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/kcalcore>

The mKCal repository can be found at:
<https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/mkcal>

The QtPIM QtOrganizer API (currently in tech-preview status) can be
found at: <http://code.qt.io/cgit/qt/qtpim.git/>

#### UI Layer API

A set of QML bindings for the platform API have been written to allow
calendar and event information to be accessed and modified in QtQuick
applications on Sailfish OS. These APIs have been developed specifically
for Sailfish OS and the Nemo Mobile project, and are fully open-source.
The repository also includes tools to inspect, import, and export
calendar event information.

The nemo-qml-plugin-calendar repository can be found at:
<https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/nemo-qml-plugin-calendar>

#### Android Compatibility

Calendar data is shared with Android applications which have been
allowed the appropriate permissions by the user, via a device-local
bridge database. Android applications can access that information via
the normal Android APIs once they have been granted permission by the
user.

### Storage And Middleware

Sailfish OS includes a variety of middleware pieces related to the
calendar domain, and specific storage and synchronization
implementations exist for the platform.

#### Storage Backend

The mKCal platform API also includes an sqlite-based storage backend.
There are plans to migrate way from mKCal eventually, for reasons of
maintainability, and as part of that process two things would occur:
first, a QtOrganizer backend could use mKCal as its storage provider
during a transition phase; second, a native QtOrganizer sqlite backend
could be written specifically to take advantage of the performance and
maintainability improvements which would result.

#### Synchronization

As with other data-related domains, synchronization of calendar data is
controlled by Buteo (the synchronization framework used in Sailfish OS).
Synchronization with a variety of data sources is supported through a
number of data-source-specific synchronization plugins. Each plugin is
independent, although many of them share significant amounts of code to
ease maintenance.

The various synchronization plugins are listed below:

  - CalDAV:
    <https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/buteo-sync-plugin-caldav>
  - Google:
    <https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/buteo-sync-plugins-social/tree/master/src/google/google-calendars>
  - Facebook:
    <https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/buteo-sync-plugins-social/tree/master/src/facebook/facebook-calendars>
  - VKontakte:
    <https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/buteo-sync-plugins-social/tree/master/src/vk/vk-calendars>
  - SyncML (over Bluetooth or HTTP):
    <https://git.sailfishos.org/mer-core/buteo-sync-plugins/tree/master/clientplugins/syncmlclient>
  - Proprietary synchronization plugins (e.g. for Microsoft Exchange
    ActiveSync) also exist but are not open-source.

### Contribution

Community or third-party contributions to various components of the
calendar stack in Sailfish OS are encouraged and appreciated. The vast
majority of the components are open-source, and the developers of the
components actively monitor issues raised within the Sailfish OS gitlab
instance (https://git.sailfishos.org/), and are also available in IRC
(\#sailfishos@freenode) and via email.

Specifically, contributions would be very welcome in the following
areas:

  - unit test improvements both for the current platform API and mKCal
    storage backend, and for synchronization plugins
  - test accounts on CalDAV instances
  - test robots to perform smoke testing for synchronization plugins
  - implementation of a native, sqlite-based QtOrganizer backend

For in-depth information about contributing to the CalDAV
synchronisation plugin, please see [CalDAV and CardDAV Community
Contributions](/Develop/Collaborative_Development/CalDAV_and_CardDAV_Community_Contributions).
