---
title: Android Compatibility
permalink: Reference/Android_Compatibility/

---

## Android Compatibility

When talking about Android compatibility in relation to Sailfish OS,
there are two distinct possible meanings. This page gives an overview of
the ways in which Sailfish OS provides Android compatibility in relation
to those distinct meanings.

### Hardware Support

Sailfish OS is a modern GNU/Linux operating system which uses glibc and
utilises libhybris to leverage board support packages provided by OEMs
for Android. This allows Sailfish OS to be ported to (almost) any device
which currently runs Android. This simplifies device creation and
product planning, as device manufacturers can reuse existing device
platforms to create Sailfish OS variant devices.

### Android Application Support

Separate from this, some configurations of Sailfish OS provide support
for running Android applications. This support requires the inclusion of
an implementation of the Android run-time virtual machine (Dalvik or
ART). Sailfish OS defines some specific integration points between the
Android run-time and the native Sailfish OS services, to enforce access
control and security for system and user data.

#### Data Bridge

Specific subsets of data can be exposed to the Dalvik implementation via
the data bridge. The bridge consists of a variety of services which
synchronise data between the native databases and the bridge databases.
In the future, this will be improved so that the bridge services read
from and write to the native databases directly, but that step requires
a variety of improvements to the security model of Sailfish OS before it
can be implemented in a secure manner.

#### Permissions

Permissions for Android applications are enforced by the Dalvik
implementation. Each application can only access the data or
functionalities granted to it by the user.
