---
title: Combining_C++_with_QML
permalink: Develop/Apps/Tutorials/Combining_C++_with_QML/

---

QML is the preferred way of developing apps for Sailfish OS. However
there are many cases where this is by itself not enough and dropping
into native code is necessary. Common reasons include performance,
utilizing existing C/C++ libraries and so on. This tutorial describes
how to create an application that combines a QML frontend with a C++
backend. We are going to create a simple application that displays a
list of unusual animals. Tapping on any animal causes it to move to the
top of the list.

![Screenshot](Tutorial_-_Combining_C++_with_QML_-_Screenshot.png
"Screenshot")

Combining C++ and QML requires three distinct steps. First we need to
create a data model, then we need to expose it to the QML engine and
finally we need to call methods on it. Let’s go through these steps in
detail. Full source code for this sample can be checked out from [this
repository](https://github.com/sailfishos/cppqml-sample).

## Creating the model

Exposing data from C++ into QML is done via the [Qt Model/View
framework](http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/model-view-programming.html). Our model
is a simple array of strings. Qt provides a
[QStringListModel](http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qstringlistmodel.html) for this
use case but for educational purposes we will provide our own by
inheriting from a
[QAbstractListModel](http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qabstractlistmodel.html). The
relevant parts of the model header file look like this.

`  `  
`class DemoModel : public QAbstractListModel`  
`{`  
`    Q_OBJECT`  
`public:`  
`    enum DemoRoles {`  
`        NameRole = Qt::UserRole + 1,`  
`    };`  
`  `  
`    explicit DemoModel(QObject *parent = 0);`  
`  `  
`    virtual int rowCount(const QModelIndex&) const { return backing.size(); }`  
`    virtual QVariant data(const QModelIndex &index, int role) const;`  
`  `  
`    QHash<int, QByteArray> roleNames() const;`  
`  `  
`    Q_INVOKABLE void activate(const int i);`  
`  `  
`private:`  
`    QVector<QString> backing;`  
`};`

There are a few things to take note of. The first is the `backing`
variable which holds the list of animals we want to show to the user.
The second is the custom method `activate` that we want to call from
QML. To make it callable we need to mark it with the `Q_INVOKABLE`
macro. In the implementation file we start by telling Qt what our data
elements look like. This is simple as we only have one piece of data to
show, the name of the animal.

`  `  
`QHash<int, QByteArray> DemoModel::roleNames() const {`  
`    QHash<int, QByteArray> roles;`  
`    roles[NameRole] = "name";`  
`    return roles;`  
`}`

If our data was more complicated we would define more roles here. As an
example a list displaying people’s names could have two different roles:
a given name role and a family name role. The second half of getting
data displayed is the function that returns data for a given role. This
is specified by Qt’s model system and it looks like this.

`  `  
`QVariant DemoModel::data(const QModelIndex &index, int role) const {`  
`    if(!index.isValid()) {`  
`        return QVariant();`  
`    }`  
`    if(role == NameRole) {`  
`        return QVariant(backing[index.row()]);`  
`    }`  
`    return QVariant();`  
`}`

This is very simple. If the `index` is valid and the role is correct,
just return the name inside a `QVariant`. Otherwise return an empty
`QVariant`. The last method we have is the one that is called when an
item is activated.

`  `  
`void DemoModel::activate(const int i) {`  
`    if(i < 0 || i >= backing.size()) {`  
`        return;`  
`    }`  
`    QString value = backing[i];`  
`  `  
`    // Remove the value from the old location.`  
`    beginRemoveRows(QModelIndex(), i, i);`  
`    backing.erase(backing.begin() + i);`  
`    endRemoveRows();`  
`  `  
`    // Add it to the top.`  
`    beginInsertRows(QModelIndex(), 0, 0);`  
`    backing.insert(0, value);`  
`    endInsertRows();`  
`}`

The operation is very simple, we just remove the item from the given
location and insert it to the top. However we need to surround the
modifications with calls to the begin and end methods . These calls
inform Qt that our model’s state will change and it should update all
views that are displaying this model’s data. We don’t have to do
anything on the QML side to update the display, Qt takes care of all the
details.

## Exposing the model to QML

A C++ model by itself is not very useful, there also needs to be a way
to create one from QML. This is accomplished by exposing the new object
type to the QML Engine which can be easily done during application
startup.

`  `  
`int main(int argc, char *argv[])`  
`{`  
`    // Set up QML engine.`  
`    QScopedPointer<QGuiApplication> app(SailfishApp::application(argc, argv));`  
`    QScopedPointer<QQuickView> v(SailfishApp::createView());`  
`  `  
`    // If you wish to publish your app on the Jolla harbour, it is recommended`  
`    // that you prefix your internal namespaces with "harbour.".`  
`    //`  
`    // For details see:`  
`    // https://harbour.jolla.com/faq#1.5.0`  
`    qmlRegisterType<DemoModel>("com.example", 1, 0, "DemoModel");`  
`  `  
`    // Start the application.`  
`    v->setSource(SailfishApp::pathTo("qml/cppqml.qml"));`  
`    v->show();`  
`    return app->exec();`  
`}`

Here we create an application and a
[QQuickView](http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qquickview.html). We store them in
[QScopedPointers](http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qscopedpointer.html) to make
sure their resources are appropriately released. The next line does the
actual exporting. It exposes the `DemoModel` under the namespace
`com.example`, version 1.0. This allows QML pages to instantiate
`DemoModel` components as if they were native data types. The last step
to complete our application is to create a page to display the contents
of the model.

## Displaying data in a view

Instantiating and displaying a `DemoModel` is straightforward.

`  `  
`import QtQuick 2.0`  
`import Sailfish.Silica 1.0`  
`import com.example 1.0`  
`  `  
`Page {`  
`    id: page`  
`  `  
`    SilicaListView {`  
`  `  
`        anchors.fill: parent`  
`  `  
`        model: DemoModel {`  
`            id: dmodel`  
`        }`  
`  `  
`        header: PageHeader {`  
`            id: header`  
`            title: "Unusual animals"`  
`        }`  
`  `  
`        delegate: BackgroundItem {`  
`            Label {`  
`                x: Theme.horizontalPageMargin`  
`                text: name`  
`            }`  
`            onClicked: dmodel.activate(index)`  
`        }`  
`    }`  
`}`

Here we create a `SilicaListView` and set `DemoModel` as its data model.
All the actual work is done inside the delegate. It is a simple text
label that just takes its content from the model. This is done with the
line of code that says `text: name`, which tells QML to obtain the name
role for the current item. This causes a call to the data method
described above with index and role automatically populated. Finally, to
make the clicked item move to the top, we set the `onClicked` property.
When clicked this will instruct the QML engine to call the activate
method of the `DemoModel` with the given index. The delegate’s `index`
variable is automatically provided by QML.

## Exercise for the reader

Now you should have an application that combines C++ to QML and you
should be able to create your own custom models. Currently the code
alters the backing model by adding and removing the same element. Qt
provides a smoother way of achieving the same thing: moving rows. This
allows e.g. the view to animate the transition better. Try converting
this code to use move operations instead. You should not need to change
the QML files at all.
