---
title: Cellular Modem Abstraction
permalink: Reference/Core_Areas_and_APIs/Apps_and_MW/Telephony/Cellular_Modem_Abstraction/

---

Cellular Modem Abstraction is a part of the [Cellular Telephony
Architecture](/Reference/Core_Areas_and_APIs/Apps_and_MW/Telephony/Cellular_Telephony_Architecture)

## oFono

OFono is a daemon that essentially provides a modem adaptation with a
modem independent D-Bus interface for the telephony application
development. The aim of the oFono software project is to offer a 3GPP
GSM/UMTS (Global System for Mobile communications / Universal Mobile
Telecommunications System) standard compliant software framework. Note
that oFono explicitly does not support all the GSM features, most
notably the SIM phonebook writing. The compliancy includes such items as
the decoding and de-fragmentation of an SMS message. The Mer project has
its own fork of oFono that has added support to that of upstream
project. There is added support for features such as Network Identity
and Time Zone (NITZ) indication support and some added SMS handling to
enable MMS support in the Mer platform as well as some other platform
specific fixes.

## libqofono

The libqofono package provides both a library for accessing the oFono
daemon and a plugin to allow QML applications to access oFono using the
Qt Quick module. Libqofono is basically just a Qt wrapper of oFono.

Note that although QML UI applications can use Libqofono to communicate
with oFono, this can be problematic in some cases. The first reason is
that typically the QML UI application is closed when the end-user exits
the application, hence the application stops receiving indications and
replies to requests it has made. The second reason is the behaviour of
the oFono interface. For example, if the application makes a request to
start the network scan and is restarted while the scan is still in
progress, it cannot in some cases know that the scan is still in
progress. Calling the oFono “NetworkRegistration” D-Bus interface
methods “Scan” or “Register”, or the “NetworkOperator” interface method
“Register”, while the “Scan” is still in progress, will return with an
error “InProgress”. So although it is the “Scan” that is still in
progress, it cannot be distinguished from the “NetworkRegistration”
interface method call “Register”.

## oFono Details

oFono has four main components, the core daemon, the atoms, the drivers,
and the plugins.

The oFono core provides the internal interface that the plugins and the
drivers must implement, thus enabling the common D-BUS API to exist. It
also loads the plugins and drivers. The core manages each connected
device independently providing support for multiple modems and multiple
SIM cards to be present at the same time. Besides these core
functionalities, it also provides common utility functions for reading
and writing the SIM card and interpreting the contents of the SIM
low-level Element File contents. There are also utility functions for
decoding, encoding and fragmentation of binary SMS protocol data units
as well as functions for decoding, duplicate detection and pagination of
cell broadcasts and character set conversion. The core also provides
functions for detection of and communication between oFono atoms.

oFono atoms are an integral part of the core. The oFono atom is more a
concept rather than an actual module as there are no separate libraries,
folders or files for atoms. There is an atom for each main
telephony/modem feature such as SMS, CBS (Cell Broadcast Service) and
SIM but they can represent other things too. It is the atoms that
provide the oFono D-Bus interface. To simplify, each oFono driver is
linked to an atom and an atom is attached to a modem. The atoms detect
each other and communicate between themselves using the information
provided by other atoms for their own needs. For example, the GPRS
(General Packet Radio Service) atom requests the Network Registration
atom to notify about changes in the network registration status.

The oFono drivers provide a means to integrate multiple device
technologies. Drivers handle the adaptation of a specific protocols.
They translate generic oFono requests, such as a dial request, to a
protocol specific request and forward the request to the correct device.
For example, in an AT command based modem a voice call dial request to a
number 1234567 is translated to a command "ATD1234567;". This way the
oFono can support multiple types of devices based on a variety of
communication protocols. The upstream oFono has support for multiple
modems using the AT command set, and it includes an ISI protocol based
driver and a Qualcomm QMI modem driver. The oFono plugins make it
possible for developers to tailor oFono for their purposes. The main
purpose of the plugins is to provide a means to recognize the available
modem or modems and enable the use of them by loading the correct
communication protocol, atoms and drivers. Besides these, a plugin can
be made to either provide optional interface support, such as network
time support, or simply extend the existing functionality, such as
provisioning the GPRS context.

Another helpful way to describe the architecture or structure of oFono
is to divide it into five areas as shown below: Core, plugins, a common
modem and a protocol independent D-Bus interface, a modem or vendor
specific drivers, and a protocol specific communication layer.

Figure: OFono overview

In this division the core is considered the same as the previously
explained one but the concept of atoms is considered as being part of
it. The D-Bus interface is implemented within the core or into a plugin
but is considered as a separate entity. The drivers and the plugins are
also as explained earlier but the biggest difference is to consider the
communication layer and the drivers as separate entities.

The communication layer takes care of the message scheduling and the
queue mechanism and provides a protocol specific communication channel.
The idea behind this division is that there can be several modems with
their own command set needing their own driver implementations but which
can use the same communication layer implementation.

The Mer project has modified and added features to their fork of oFono.
These include an enhanced GPRS context provisioning, a signalling of the
changed operator list, an interface for sending arrays of raw bytes to
the modem, a signalling of received SMS message status reports and
support for forwarding WAP push messages to Mms-engine as well as
support for a ringback tone and network time (NITZ). However, the main
addition is the Android RIL support. This means that if the system can
utilize the Android binaries, the oFono can use the Android RIL to
communicate with the modem. The Mer oFono RIL support was initially
based on the one provided by Canonical. but has since diverged from that
version. The RIL support consists of drivers providing RIL interface
support; a communication layer enabling the socket communication with
the RIL daemon; and a set of plugins for recognizing the existence of
the RIL daemon, loading the related drivers and starting the
communication using the communication layer.
