---
title: Danish
permalink: Develop/L10n/Style_Guides/Danish/

---

Please consult Retskrivningsordbogen (the 2012 version) frequently. This
is the most prominent Danish tool for correct spelling, punctuation,
abbreviations and the like. Retskrivningsordbogen can be found online:
<http://www.dsn.dk/ro/>. Here you can search for entries (the tab
“Retskrivningsordbogen”), and you can search through rules (the tab
“Retskrivningsregler”). In case of discrepancies between these
guidelines and Retskrivningsordbogen, please raise a query.

# Grammar

## Spelling

The latest edition of Retskrivningsordbogen allows for alternative
spelling of some terms. For the sake of consistency, please note the
following:

  - Allowed: **it, tv, cd-rom**
  - Instead of: **IT, TV, CD-rom**

## Nouns

Please remember that in Danish (unlike in English), most compound nouns
must be written in one word.

  - Correct: **kaffebønner, testrapport**
  - Incorrect: **kaffe bønner, test rapport**

If in doubt: Consult Retskrivningsordbogen, or simply write it in one
word.

## Person

Please try to be informal if that is natural in your language.

In Danish, use the second person:

  - Correct: **Vælg sange**
  - Incorrect: **Brugeren vælger sange**

Avoid using gender:

  - Correct: **Vælg sangene**
  - Incorrect: **Han vælger selv sangene**

Avoid pronouns:

  - Incorrect: **Du vælger selv sangene**

Keep addressing consistent: e.g. if a paragraph was started using the
second person, retain it throughout all its sentences (as opposed to
switching to third person or neutral mood).

For example:

  - Correct: **Forsanger**
  - Incorrect: **Sangerinde**

## Tense

Use the present tense. E.g.:

  - Correct: **Media player vælger sangene**
  - Incorrect: **Media player vil vælge sangene**

For example:

  - Correct: **Opdater dine kontoindstillinger i…**
  - Incorrect: **Kontoindstillinger opdateres i…**

For example:

  - Correct: **Gå til Indstillinger**
  - Incorrect: **Brugeren går til Indstillinger**

Capitalise application names and company names.

  - E.g. application name: **Kalender**.

In software UI: Start the first word with a capital letter, but not the
subsequent ones. The UI term Åbn besked, e.g.:

  - Correct: **Gå til Åbn besked**
  - Incorrect: **Gå til Åbn Besked**, **Gå til åbn besked**

In all other instances, please respect the capitalisation rules of the
language in question – see Retskrivningsordbogen.

# Punctuation

## Comma

The traditional Danish comma is used (see Retskrivningsordbogen).

## Hyphenation

Use hyphen in object-verbal noun compounds.

  - Correct: **read only-fil**
  - Incorrect: **read only fil, readonly fil**

Use hyphens in compound nouns.

  - Correct: cd-rom, cd-rom-drev
  - Incorrect: cd rom, cd rom drev or cd-rom drev

Please note that the hypen is short (-). For dashes, please use short
dash (–, "en dash", Alt + 0150). Do not use English long dashes (—, "em
dash", Alt + 0151) or double dashes. In many cases, dash may be replaced
by comma in the Danish sentence.

## Series

Use a comma to separate elements in a series, but not between the last
two elements.

  - Correct: **Vælg sang, mappe og placering**
  - Incorrect: **Vælg sang, mappe, og placering**

Use a semicolon to separate items in a series when one or more items
have internal punctuation.

# Numerals

For example:

  - Correct: **1 besked modtaget**
  - Incorrect: **En besked modtaget**

In Danish, decimals are written with a comma, unlike the English full
stop: **2,5 kg**

Thousand separators are written as full stop unlike the English comma:
**12.500 kg**

## Measurements

Use numerals for measurements.

Use a space between the numeral and the unit. This also goes for
percentage signs and degrees: **250 kg, 45 %, 20 ˚C**

# Terminology
